# rpi23-gen-image

## Introduction

`rpi23-gen-image.sh` is an Debian Linux bootstrapping shell script for generating Debian OS images for Raspberry Pi 2 (RPi2, 32 bit) and Raspberry Pi 3 (RPi3, 64 bit) computers.

*Note by Paul Hill:*

This is another fork from the original project by github user "drtyhlpr", utilizing the work of github user michaelfranzl and current stable release of Debian 9.
Please review the changes as they are significant compared to the original project and the fork Micahel Franzl started.  Please visit Michael Franzl's github for
original notes https://github.com/michaelfranzl/rpi23-gen-image.  This is still in development.

* Only Debian 9 is supported.
* Designed to be similar to a base Debian 9 install with system utilities and ssh.
* Only the official/mainline/vanilla Linux kernel is supported (not the raspberry flavor kernel).
* The Linux kernel must be pre-cross-compiled on the PC running this script (instructions below).
* Only U-Boot booting is supported.
* The U-Boot sources must be pre-downloaded and pre-cross-compiled on the PC running this script (instructions below).
* The installation of the system to an SD card is done by simple copying or rsyncing, rather than creating, shrinking and expanding file system images.

*Major changes:*

* Designed to use current kernel from Debian 9.
* Major remake of rpi23-gen-image.sh
    > Removed variables that were not in use.
    > Moved most IF statements into a function.
    > Downloads firmware for boot and wireless LAN.
    > APT includes are similar to a base + system utility build for Debian 9.
    > Removed all reduce size functionality.
* Rework of files directory
    > Removed most files that were not used and not applicable.
    > bootstrap.d scripts now generate some files that were removed
* Rework of firstboot
    > Original a subfolder of files, moved to parent directory.
    > Removed a few scripts that were not needed for this fork.
* Added pmg binary.
    > pmg is a Rust project I started for generating MAC addresses, and it is needed for this installation to keep the same MAC address for the LAN during reboots.
    > MAC address generated by pmg binary is listed in the /etc/network/interfaces file under eth0 hwaddress.
    > Visit https://github.com/hillsys/pmg for more information.
* Added en-us.sh example file.
    > This file contains all the variables that can be set for the rpi23-gen-image.sh script
* bootstrap.d
    > Changes to most scripts here.
    > Removal of scripts that are no longer needed.
    > Still in development


This script only supports:

RPi2 with u-boot with official kernel  
RPi3 with u-boot with official kernel --Not tested

This script is EXPERIMENTAL, and still in development.

It is assumed that you know how to navigate folders, utilize a text editor (vi, vim, nano, etc.), and are familiar with some basic Debian commands such as apt.
If you are not logged in as root on your system, you will need to utilize sudo for root privileges for most commands.

## Setting up host environment

Depending on how you want to make your image will determine what you need for storage space.  If you are wanting to create a .img file instead of copying directly
to the micro SD card, such as a case in a virtualized environment, you will need to create a 3GB drive with two partitions to mimic the SD card installation.  My 
build drive is 10GB and it is 2/3 full, and my image drive is 3GB if that helps you understand what you will require for storage.

We will work with the following directories:

    ~/workspace
      |- rpi23-gen-image
      |- linux-4.9.30
      |- u-boot

*Note:  workspace can be a whole drive or partition.  You do not have to actually create a workspace directory for organization.*

Do the following steps as root user or utilizing sudo.
    
### Optional:  Set up caching for apt

This way, you won't have to re-download hundreds of megabytes of Debian packages from the Debian server every time you run the `rpi23-gen-image` script.

    apt-get install apt-cacher-ng

Check its status page:

    http://localhost:3142
    
*Note:  This is not needed, but it is highly recommended.  I have removed the hardcode of the apt-catcher from the script files.*

### Install dependencies

The following list of Debian packages must be installed on the build system because they are essentially required for the bootstrapping process.

    apt-get install debootstrap debian-archive-keyring qemu-user-static binfmt-support dosfstools rsync bmap-tools whois git bc device-tree-compiler dbus psmisc
    
For a RPi2, you also need:

    apt-get install crossbuild-essential-armhf
    
For a RPi3, you also need:

    apt-get install crossbuild-essential-arm64
       
### Kernel compilation

From your workspace, get linux source from Debian.

    apt source linux-source-4.9
    
If you want to generate the default `.config` file that is also working on the Raspberry, execute

    make mrproper
    
For a RPi2:

    make ARCH=arm CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabihf- multi_v7_defconfig
    
For a RPi3:
    
    make ARCH=arm64 CROSS_COMPILE=aarch64-linux-gnu- defconfig
    
    
Whichever `.config` file you have at this point, if you want to get more control as to what is enabled in the kernel, you can run the graphical configuration tool at this point:

    apt-get install libglib2.0-dev libgtk2.0-dev libglade2-dev
    
For a RPi2:

    make ARCH=arm CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabihf- gconfig
    
For a RPi3:
    
    make ARCH=arm64 CROSS_COMPILE=aarch64-linux-gnu- gconfig

    
Before compiling the kernel, back up your `.config` file so that you don't lose it after the next `make mrproper`:

    cp .config ../kernelconfig-backup.txt
    

#### Compiling the kernel
   
Find out how many CPU cores you have to speed up compilation:

    NUM_CPU_CORES=$(grep -c processor /proc/cpuinfo)
    
Run the compilation on all CPU cores. This takes about 10 minutes on a modern PC:

For a RPi2:

    make -j${NUM_CPU_CORES} ARCH=arm CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabihf-
    
For a RPi3:
    
    make -j${NUM_CPU_CORES} ARCH=arm64 CROSS_COMPILE=aarch64-linux-gnu-
    
    
Verify that you have the required kernel image.

For a RPi2 this is:

    ./arch/arm/boot/zImage
    
For a RPi3 this is:

    ./arch/arm64/boot/Image.gz
    
    
### U-Boot bootloader compilation

    cd ..
    git clone git://git.denx.de/u-boot.git

Confirmed working revision: b24cf8540a85a9bf97975aadd6a7542f166c78a3

    git checkout b24cf8540a

Let's increase the maximum kernel image size from the default (8 MB) to 64 MB. This way, u-boot will be able to boot even larger kernels. Edit `./u-boot/include/configs/rpi.h` and add above the very last line (directly above "#endif"):

    #define CONFIG_SYS_BOOTM_LEN (64 * 1024 * 1024)

Find out how many CPU cores you have to speed up compilation:

    NUM_CPU_CORES=$(grep -c processor /proc/cpuinfo)

Compile for a RPi model 2 (32 bits):

    make -j${NUM_CPU_CORES} ARCH=arm CROSS_COMPILE=arm-linux-gnueabihf- rpi_2_defconfig all
    
Compile for a RPi model 3 (64 bits):
    
    make -j${NUM_CPU_CORES} ARCH=arm CROSS_COMPILE=aarch64-linux-gnu- rpi_3_defconfig all
    
Verify that you have the required bootloader file:

    ./u-boot.bin

   
### Build the system!


This is where you call the `rpi23-gen-image.sh` script contained in this repository.

    cd ../..
    git clone https://
    cd rpi23-gen-image

For example:

    DEBIAN_RELEASE="stretch" \
    USER_NAME="pi" \
    PASSWORD="xxx" \
    APT_INCLUDES="i2c-tools,rng-tools,avahi-daemon,rsync,vim" \
    UBOOTSRC_DIR="$(pwd)/../u-boot" \
    KERNELSRC_DIR="$(pwd)/../linux" \
    RPI_MODEL=2 \
    HOSTNAME="rpi2" \
    RPI_FIRMWARE_DIR="$(pwd)/../raspberry-firmware" \
    ENABLE_REDUCE=true \
    REDUCE_SSHD=true \
    ./rpi23-gen-image.sh

You may want to modify the variables according to the section "Command-line parameters" below.

The file `example.sh` in this repostory contains a working example.


    
### Install the system on a SD card

Insert a SD card into the card reader of your host PC. You'll need two partitions on it. I'll leave as an exercise for the reader the creation of a  partition table according to the following output of `fdisk` for a 32GB card:

    Device         Boot  Start        End    Sectors    Size   Id  Type
    /dev/mmcblk0p1        2048     500000     497953  243.1M    c  W95 FAT32 (LBA)
    /dev/mmcblk0p2      501760   62552063   62050304   29.6G   83  Linux

The following commands will erase all contents of the SD card and install the system (copy via rsync) on the SD card:

    umount /dev/mmcblk0p1
    umount /dev/mmcblk0p2

    mkfs.vfat /dev/mmcblk0p1
    mkfs.ext4 /dev/mmcblk0p2

    mkdir -p /mnt/raspcard

    mount /dev/mmcblk0p2 /mnt/raspcard
    mkdir -p /mnt/raspcard/boot/firmware
    mount /dev/mmcblk0p1 /mnt/raspcard/boot/firmware

    rsync -a ./images/stretch/build/chroot/ /mnt/raspcard

    umount /dev/mmcblk0p1
    umount /dev/mmcblk0p2
    

*Note about SD cards:* Cheap (or sometimes even professional) SD cards can be weird at times. I've repeatedly noticed corrupt/truncated files even after proper rsync and proper umount on different brand new SD cards. TODO: Add a method to verify all file checksums after rsync.


    
### Try booting the Raspberry

Insert the SD card into the Raspberry Pi, and if everything went well, you should see a console-based login prompt on the screen. Login with the login details you've passed into the script (USER_NAME and PASSWORD).

Alternatively, if you have included "avahi-daemon" in your APT_INCLUDES, you don't need a screen and keyboard and can simply log in via SSH from another computer, even without knowing the Rasberry's dynamic/DHCP IP address (replace "hostname" and "username" with what you have set as USER_NAME and HOSTNAME above):

    ssh username@hostname.local


### Finishing touches directly on the Raspberry

Remember to change usernames, passwords, and SSH keys!


#### Network Time Synchronization

The Raspberry doesn't have a real time clock. But the default `systemd` conveniently syncs time from the network. Check the output of `timedatectl`. Confirmed working for both RPi2 and RPi3.


#### Hardware Random Number Generator

The working device node is available at `/dev/hwrng`. Confirmed working for both RPi2 and RPi3.


#### I2C Bus

Also try I2C support:

    apt-get install ic2-tools
    i2cdetect -y 0

Confirmed working for both RPi2 and RPi3.


#### Test onboard LEDs

As of the kernel revision referenced above, this only works on the RPi2. The RPi3  has only the red PWR LED on all the time, but otherwise is working fine.

By default, the green onboard LED of the RPi blinks in a heartbeat pattern according to the system load (this is done by kernel feature LEDS_TRIGGER_HEARTBEAT).

To use the green ACT LED as an indicator for disc access, execute:

    echo mmc0 > /sys/class/leds/ACT/trigger

To toggle the red PWR LED:

    echo 0 > /sys/class/leds/PWR/brightness # Turn off
    echo 1 > /sys/class/leds/PWR/brightness # Turn on 
    
Or use the red PWR LED as heartbeat indicator:

    echo heartbeat > /sys/class/leds/PWR/trigger
       

#### Test GPU acceleration via VC4 kernel driver

Successfully tested on the RPi2 and RPI3.

    apt-get install mesa-utils
    glxgears
    glxinfo | grep '^OpenGL'
    
Glxinfo should output:

    OpenGL vendor string: Broadcom
    OpenGL renderer string: Gallium 0.4 on VC4
    OpenGL version string: 2.1 Mesa 12.0.3
    OpenGL shading language version string: 1.20
    OpenGL ES profile version string: OpenGL ES 2.0 Mesa 12.0.3
    OpenGL ES profile shading language version string: OpenGL ES GLSL ES 1.0.16

### Notes will be expanded upon